name: dukkah
yield: makes ~1 small jar
notes: |
  Tuned sweeter and less earthy than classic dukkah, for dipping bread in olive oil.
  The earthiness in standard dukkah comes mostly from cumin, black pepper, and the
  bitter skins on the nuts — so here cumin is minimal (or omitted), pepper is optional,
  the hazelnuts are skinned, and the sweetness leans on fennel + coriander + warm
  spices (cinnamon, cardamom) plus the natural sweetness of hazelnut.

  Toast everything separately (they brown at different rates) and grind the whole spices
  fresh — toasting-then-grinding is much sweeter and more aromatic than pre-ground.
  Keep it coarse: for bread & oil you want crunch and cling, not powder. Don't over-blitz
  the nuts or they turn to butter.

  Nut swaps: pistachio (sweeter/floral, green) or almond (mild, cheap) work in place of
  hazelnut, or a 2:1 hazelnut:pistachio blend. Toast them the same way regardless — every
  nut gets toasted for sweetness and crunch; only hazelnuts also need skinning.

  Store airtight; best within a few weeks before the nuts stale. Sprinkle also on labneh,
  yoghurt, roast pumpkin, or (with the optional coconut sugar) ice cream.
ingredients:
  - item: hazelnuts
    mass: 100
    basis: true
    note: toasted & skinned (skins are bitter/earthy). sub pistachios or almonds — still toasted, just no skinning needed
  - item: white sesame seeds
    mass: 50
  - item: coriander seeds
    mass: 15
    qty: 2
    unit: tbsp
    note: citrusy-sweet, the main non-nut backbone
  - item: fennel seeds
    mass: 8
    qty: 1
    unit: tbsp
    note: the biggest sweet/anise lever
  - item: cumin seeds
    mass: 3
    qty: 1
    unit: tsp
    optional: true
    note: the earthy one — keep small, or omit for the least earthy result
  - item: ground cinnamon
    mass: 1.5
    qty: 0.5
    unit: tsp
  - item: ground cardamom
    mass: 1
    qty: 0.5
    unit: tsp
    note: or freshly ground seeds of ~3-4 pods
  - item: flaky sea salt
    mass: 5
    note: a bit generous — it's eaten with oil & bread
  - item: black pepper
    optional: true
    note: small pinch; omit to keep it sweet
  - item: coconut sugar
    mass: 10
    qty: 1
    unit: tbsp
    optional: true
    note: optional sweetness booster (or desiccated coconut ~2 tbsp); more dessert-leaning
  - item: dried rose petals
    optional: true
    note: optional floral-sweet top note, ~1 tsp
steps:
  - toast hazelnuts in a 180°C oven (or dry pan) ~8-10 mins until fragrant and skins loosen
  - tip hot hazelnuts into a tea towel and rub to remove as much skin as possible, then cool (for pistachios/almonds, toast the same way but skip the rub — they have no skins to remove)
  - toast sesame seeds in a dry pan over medium until golden and popping, then tip out to cool
  - 'toast the whole spices (coriander, fennel, cumin) in the dry pan ~1-2 mins until fragrant — don''t let them scorch, then cool'
  - grind the toasted whole spices to a coarse powder (mortar & pestle or spice grinder)
  - coarsely chop or briefly pulse the hazelnuts — keep them chunky, stop well before nut butter
  - combine nuts, sesame, ground spices, cinnamon, cardamom, salt (and any optional coconut sugar / rose / pepper)
  - pulse just once or twice to mix, keeping it coarse and craggy
  - taste and adjust — more salt for bread & oil, more fennel/cinnamon to push sweeter
